In the previous video I taught you about logistic regression, and in earlier videos we have used t
tests.
So what is the difference between a logistic regression and a t test?
And when would you use which method?
That is the goal of this video.
And I'll start with some discussions and then switch to a code demo where you can see how these two
analyses relate to each other in simulated data.
I'll start with showing the equations for these two analyses.
I hope that both of these equations look familiar to you from the previous video, and from elsewhere
in this course or another statistics or machine learning course.
The goal of a logistic regression is to develop a mathematical equation that generates a probability
that each data sample belongs to one of two categories.
On the other hand, a T test is a measure of the normalized difference between two means of two data
samples, and that is normalized by their standard errors.
So let's imagine a scenario where we are measuring the activations of a neuron somewhere in an LM for
two different categories of words, let's say nouns and verbs.
We could use a logistic regression to predict the probability that each token is a noun based on the
activation of that neuron.
And we could do a t test to see if there is a significant difference in the activation between nouns
and verbs.
So in this example, you can actually use both analyses on exactly the same data.
Both analyses are perfectly reasonable and valid and appropriate statistical measures.
So when should you use which one and what's the difference between them?
So I have organized their differences into this table here where you will see the discussion points
and how they are related for the two different analyses.
Let's begin with the key assumptions.
For a logistic regression, we assume that the data are drawn from one population, that is, all of
the sampled data.
For example, all the neurons or all the tokens have the same characteristics, but the rate of belonging
to one category.
For example, nouns versus verbs varies according to activation value.
In contrast, the t test makes the assumption that the two groups are drawn from distinct populations.
In other words, for a t test, we are evaluating whether nouns and verbs are actually really distinct
from each other.
Whereas with logistic regression, we're testing whether the probability of a particular activation
value is associated with nouns versus verbs.
So the t test also has an additional assumption that the data are normally distributed.
And that is not an assumption that we require for logistic regression.
In terms of the outcome of the analysis, the logistic regression gives us a parameter, or maybe a
set of parameters that we can use to generate a predictive statistical model of the data.
In contrast, the t test is actually not give us a parameter.
Instead, it provides the t statistic, which is a measure of effect size.
And this relates to the key distinction in application, which is that a logistic regression can be
used to generate a prediction.
So generate a probability that each data sample belongs to each category.
And in contrast, the t test is not used to generate predictions, certainly not at the level of an
individual data sample.
So to make this more concrete, if you have activation values from a neuron, then a logistic regression
can help you generate a prediction about whether that token that elicited the activation was a noun
or a verb.
But that kind of predictive model is not what a t test is designed for.
Another difference is that logistic regression is easy to extend to multiple variables.
So not just the activation from one neuron.
But let's say you want to look at the activations of an ensemble of neurons to see whether the relationships
of the activations across the neurons can predict whether a token is a noun or a verb.
In contrast, the t test is only designed for one dependent variable and two groups.
Of course, there are statistical analyses for more than two samples, but that would be, for example,
an Anova or a linear regression and not a t test.
So taken together, all this stuff in consideration, you would use a logistic regression when you want
to make predictions about a category or token label, or when you want to extend the analysis to using
multiple variables to predict a category label.
And you would use a t test to determine whether there are significant differences between two token
types in a neuron.
Now, of course, the t test is also fairly versatile.
You can run a t test for different tokens in each neuron in a particular layer, and you can also use
a t test for comparing the overall activations for different token types between different layers or
different groups of neurons, for example, different attention heads inside a transformer.
Now, that is not something you could do with a logistic regression.
And I would also like to stress that my goal in this slide was to highlight the differences between
these two analyses.
They also have a lot in common.
And that is what I want to focus on in the Python demo.
So let me now tell you about that.
My goal in the Python demo is to provide a counterweight to the previous slide.
That was all about differences between the analyses.
So in the Python demo, I will be highlighting the similarities of the results of the two analyses.
So the idea is fairly simple.
I'm going to simulate data from two categories and then run a logistic regression and a t test on each
of these simulated data sets.
It's a very nice experimental approach because the data are exactly the same, but the analyses are
slightly different.
So in this plot on the left, you see the logistic regression beta value on the x axis and the t value
on the y axis.
Each little green circle here shows a different simulation with a different effect size between the
nouns and the verbs.
Now the regression and the t tests do not give identical results for a variety of reasons, but they
are really, really similar.
And you see more divergences as you get to extreme values.
And I'll discuss a little bit more why this happens when we switch to code.
And here on the right you see the negative log of the p values for the logistic regression and the t
test.
The dashed lines here correspond to a statistical significance threshold of 0.05.
Again, there is some diversity when you get down to really tiny p values, which would be very large
minus log p values.
But the key message here is that when the tests are non-significant they're non-significant for both
analyses.
So the logistic regression and the t test that's here, these are all non-significant for both tests.
And when the results are statistically significant they are significant in both tests.
All right let's switch to code.
We will use the Statsmodels library to run the logistic regression and the Scipy.stats library to run
the t test.
So import those libraries here.
And now here is where I will create the simulations and run the analysis.
So let me first let me start down here.
And then I'll go back up and explain this other code up here.
So we have a for loop because I'm simulating data multiple times here.
I'm simulating activations for noun tokens.
Activations for tokens that correspond to verbs.
They are normally distributed random numbers with a population mean.
So that's what this parameter is for.
With the mean of zero, it's hard coded always to be zero mean for the nouns and for the verbs.
I am varying the mean, systematically varying the mean.
And what this does is systematically change the effect size.
So the relationship between the activations for the nouns and the activations for the verbs and the
sample size is the same for each of these.
So we have the same number of nouns as we have verbs.
Okay, so sample size is a parameter that I state up here.
Now let me say that a sample size of 30 for doing real work on LMS is really, really small.
It's a very small sample size because the data are noisy, because language is so complex.
But in this case, for this video, for this code, we are simulating data.
So sample size of 30 per group is more than sufficient okay.
And here is where I define the means.
So the means are the means for the verbs will range from minus two to plus three.
So that means that we are going to have negative t values and up to positive t values.
And in between we expect there's going to be values that are equal to and very very close to zero in
here, where we do not expect any significant differences between the activations for nouns versus verbs.
Yeah.
Simply because the means are so close to each other.
Okay.
So that's how I simulate the data here.
I'm running the logistic regression.
This code here is all the same code that you saw in the previous video?
It's a little bit more condensed.
In the previous video, I was creating the variables x and y outside of the for loop.
And then here in Smart Logic, I was just writing a y comma x like this.
So now I'm just making it a little bit more compact.
So here are the labels.
They are zeros.
And then ones of course equal sample sizes for both categories.
And here are the data.
So I'm stacking up the verbs and the nouns.
And then I'm adding a constant to the model.
And disp equals false.
Just suppresses some of the information just so it doesn't keep printing out down here.
And from this output here I am extracting the beta value and the p value.
And then I'm taking minus the log of the p value.
And why am I taking minus the log of the p value.
It's literally just for visualization.
In fact I think I will turn it off here just so you can see what it looks like when we plot the raw
p values.
So that's for the logistic regression.
Here's for the t test I'm using t test for related samples.
This is also called a paired samples t test, where I put in the nouns and the verbs.
So the activations for the nouns and the verbs.
After this simulation demo at the bottom of this code file, I'm going to show you the difference.
Difference not really different between a t test and t test.
One sample.
So I'll talk about that later.
And here I'm storing the t value and the p value.
So let's run all of this code that's very fast.
Super fast.
Uh yeah.
So it's just basically going through all of those means.
And here I am running the visualization.
So first I'm going to visualize the regression betas by the t values.
And then I will show the p values.
So what you see is that there is a really really strong concordance between the logistic regression
beta value and the t statistic.
Now remember that these are not the same thing.
They come from different analyses, different formulas, different math, different statistical approaches,
different estimation procedures.
There's a lot of differences between logistic regression and a t statistic.
But in this kind of a situation where you have two labels and continuous data like neuron activation
levels, you can use them in the same way.
They will basically give not exactly the same results, but really, really strongly comparable results,
at least until you get out to some extreme values.
And basically what happens is that the estimation of the logistic regression becomes increasingly difficult
and numerically unstable when you get perfect separation between the two categories.
We can actually demonstrate that by setting this out to let's say six.
How about minus six to plus six?
So what's happening here is that these means are going to be so far apart from each other.
The means for the nouns and the verbs at these extremes, that the logistic regression is actually going
to run into some trouble.
You will see we in fact got some error messages and a bunch of warnings.
Perfect separation.
This seems like it should be a good thing that you have perfect separability, but you end up with just
numerical issues because of the classification.
Okay, so we still get some warning messages, but no errors.
And now you can see that the beta values and the t statistics do correspond to each other very well.
Until you get to these extreme values where the data are just too good and the nonlinear estimation
techniques are just not working very well.
Okay, but let me go back to some more normal ranges here.
Okay.
So here again.
So now you see the statistical significance is these are the p values.
You can ignore these lines here.
Actually we can just change those.
So that is just set that to be plotting lines at 0.05 instead of the minus log of 0.05.
Now this is fine.
There's nothing wrong with showing data like this, but all of the p values are kind of scrunched up
here close to zero.
And you just don't really get an appreciation of the full range of the distribution of p values.
So that is why I am using of minus the log.
So now I'm going to put all of this back and you will see the difference.
So minus log.
There you go.
Rerun that code.
Yeah.
And I think now it's just a little bit visually clear what is going on here.
Again when you get to some extreme values then things start getting a little bit wonky from the regression,
but that's not really a problem.
You still see that when one test is non-significant, the other test is non-significant.
When one test is significant, the other test is significant.
So there's a lot of consistency between these two measures.
One thing, just as a reminder, when you're looking at minus the log of p, then you want to look for
large values.
This means a small p value corresponds to a large minus the log of the p value.
There's one more thing I wanted to mention, just FYI here about logistic regression.
Uh, and that is the order in which you present the labels.
So let's say, for example, that I would swap the verbs and the nouns.
So now I'm entering the data into the logistic regression first as the nouns and then as the verbs.
And basically what that means is that previously I was associating verbs with zero and nouns with one.
And now I'm associating nouns with zero and verbs with one.
And what does that do?
The short answer is that it does nothing except flip the sign of the beta value.
So now you see the same kind of relationship, the same strength of the relationship between the logistic
regression beta and the t test t value.
But now it's negative.
And what if we want to make that positive.
No problem whatsoever.
We can also swap the order of the t test.
Again when you swap the order in a t test you're not actually changing the statistics.
You're only changing.
Okay.
Let me just run into some numerical issues again.
You're not changing anything in the statistics or the statistical significance.
The only thing that you're doing is flipping the sign of the numerator.
So the t value goes from being negative to positive because you're subtracting the means the other way.
Okay, that was just a little point.
The very last thing I want to mention is the relationship between a one sample t test and a paired sample
t test.
So the code looks different.
The functions are different.
T test one sample for one sample t test rel for related samples.
Or most people call it paired samples.
Here I'm providing two inputs for the paired samples t test.
Here I'm providing one input for the data.
And that is the difference between these two activation values.
And then zero is the null hypothesis that we are going to test against and forget about what the numbers
are.
That doesn't matter.
The important thing here is that these numbers are exactly the same as these numbers.
In other words, a paired samples t test is mathematically equivalent to a one sample t test on the
differences between the data values for the two different samples.
That is not the case for a two samples t test.
It is the case for a one sample t test versus a paired samples t test.
I hope you found this video elucidating the t test and logistic regression can be used for identical
evaluation, or they can be used in different ways.
I will continue to use both of these analyses in many videos throughout the rest of this course.
So you'll see several example applications for when it's best to use which approach.
And regarding this final point here, I don't actually do a whole lot of data simulations in this course,
but I am in general a big fan of simulating data to explore and understand and gain intuition about
statistics and machine learning.